Welcome to Slash Forward. In this episode we’re
going to explore the most realistic representation
of what it would be like to live in a world where
ghosts were real, but only visible and available
to interact with when wearing a certain type of
specialty glasses. I am, of course, referring
to the 2001 cult favorite Thirteen Ghosts. After
losing his wife in a terrible house fire, Arthur
finds himself struggling to hang on and nearly
destitute despite the fact that he has two kids
and a hired nanny. Just when he needs it the most,
his estranged uncle comes to the rescue by dieing
and bequeathing his vast estate to his favorite
nephew. The family goes to explore their new home,
which inexplicably seems to have both plumbing
and electricity despite the fact that every wall,
floor and ceiling is comprised of a single pane of
shatterproof glass. But it’s easy to be distracted
from this by all of the fantastic items contained
inside the house, and also by a particular number
of ghosts therein. As they unlock the mysteries
of this architectural abomination, will Arthur be
able to navigate the various dangers that imperil
his children? That’s a rhetorical question,
we’re going to find out as we go through it
now. Be sure to hit the like button as soon
as you see your favorite of the dirty dozen,
and leave a comment if you saw this movie at
release and what your impression of it was. It
seems to be gaining more and more of a following
as time goes on, and I’m interested in how it
was perceived back in the day. Let’s get to it.
We open in a warm and inviting junkyard and try
not to toss our cookies as they get creative with
the camera work. The calm is interrupted by a
tanker truck busting through and leading the
way for a caravan of very official looking
SUVs. An army of officials then pour out
and start setting up equipment. As they do
so, rich-daddy Cyrus rolls up with Dennis,
his subordinate who happens to be suffering a
pounding headache due to being in proximity to
some ill-defined presence. We come to learn that
he has a power that has led them here in search
of the spectral version of a prolific,
and formerly corporeal, serial killer.
After pointing the way, they bring in the cube and
Dennis is put to work. Meanwhile Damon and Kalina,
a couple of empathetic ghost hunters, are captured
nearby and brought in to be sneered at for their
naive support of the post-life community. They
insist their spell book and a thirteenth ghost are
prerequisites for success in whatever is going on
here, but Cyrus has a cube, sooo it’s all good.
They also have a bait truck that drenches
the grounds in the blood of innocents.
After the stage is set they start blasting
some Necronomicon over the loudspeakers.
This sure does summon a ghostly presence, but
it’s to the detriment of the men’s skeletal
composition. With the whole place
essentially falling apart, a single,
brave nobody successfully lures the ghost into
the cube with the sacrifice of his own, juicy ass.
Once closed, Dennis confirms capture. But at what
cost? Dead bodies are strewn about and Damon,
that one guy we barely know, is dead alongside
Cyrus - the sponsor of this whole affair.
We then transition to the most naively idyllic
representation of a brother/sister relationship
possible, which pans across remnants of an entire
lifetime of familial love and affection. Through
voiceover we hear as it transitions to the chaotic
noises of a terrible house fire that results in
Jean’s death, and leads to the house falling into
disrepair - a reflection of Arthur’s mental state.
We emerge from this narrative at their new
apartment where Kathy has been pretty much
left solo to raise her bro, little Bobby. And this
is despite the fact that they have a live-in maid
named Maggie to look after the house. They get
along as best they can and sure, they have their
good moments, but are always one spilled cup of
coffee away from an outburst of unrestrained rage.
Ben Moss then arrives at their door
and, despite being a stranger to them,
is cordially invited in. As it turns out Cyrus
is Arthur’s estranged uncle, and Ben is the
executor of his estate. They fire up his final
message on some sort of bespoke media player,
and he confirms he has left them everything he has
- a key to a house, the one thing they need most.
Quite a turn of good luck for these down and
out losers, which he hopes makes up for his
absence in life. As they consider this, Bobby
the little death freak overshares as always.
Despite the secluded location, which would
keep them far from everything familiar,
they at least go to check it out. And, in
a moment of excitement, they become giddy
about how great life may be now. Meanwhile, up
ahead, Ben is driving along and serving up looks.
Elsewhere, Kalina is in her workshop
gathering up her collection of pipe
bombs and magical artefacts before going
to go and see what’s up with Cyrus.
When the family arrives, they’re taken aback by
the postmodern facade of their new, glass house.
Also, Dennis happens to be there in that
moment, pretending like he’s a power man
and claiming the home has caused widespread
power outages in the hope he may gain access.
Ben has a black heart, but Arthur is
eager to show off his new home. So,
he slides in his single-use key and sets
into motion some strange machinations.
With no walls, they get a little preview before
the foyer opens up and invites them in. Inside,
they delight in examining all of uncle CC’s cool
and exotic items, wondering how much cash they may
be able to squeeze out of them. Dennis is given
direction to the breaker box in the basement,
as Ben leads Arthur to the den so
they can handle the final paperwork.
Downstairs, it’s revealed through
self-exposition that Dennis is looking
for a pile of money he suspects is down there.
But then some psychic strobing takes him off his
goal by presenting some new information that
must be addressed. So he puts on his special
glasses and now sees that the glass chambers
each contain horrors from the beyond that,
apparently, he also can’t hear or be
disturbed by when the glasses are off?
Upstairs Arthur hesitates to finalize the deed
as he’s worried about the tax obligations,
even though he could also just sell the house.
But there is no need as Ben confirms that he
will never again want for money. But then Dennis
interrupts the signing to explain to them in
simple turns, that he is Dennis - the Dennis. His
uncle’s partner in hunting ghosts. The gravity of
this revelation is still not quite landing, so he
promises to explain further once they get outside.
Unfortunately, the rest of the gang has already
scattered, going each in their own direction
to scout out their new surroundings
and call dibs on the various rooms.
Kathy finds the princess suite, filled
with only the best fragrances and all
the finest oils and liniments. This
could not be any more perfect for her.
Meanwhile, Dennis continues to insist the home
is dangerous, but then keels over and creams his
pants as Arthur consistently refuses to decline
to touch him. Demonstrating that for Dennis,
the true danger is man. Once he finishes, they
look around and discover that Ben is now gone.
He’s heading into the basement on his own with
some special glasses so he can say what up to some
ghosts and then grab the money case. Although the
case is, to his detriment, on a pressure pad that
causes the house to begin manipulating itself in
mysterious ways. Once everything lines up just so,
it releases one ghost. The timing for Ben could
not be worse, and he attempts to remove himself
from this situation by backing up slowly,
but retreats only halfway between a pair
of sturdy glass doors with no impact detection -
resulting in a full, vertical bodily bifurcation.
As Arthur and Dennis go searching, the rest of
them go about their business completely unaware
that all around them is blood and
death. This becomes very precarious
as Kathy is saved just before she
completely interrupts tubby time.
The adults all group up, then go off in
search of Bobby, who is summoned into the
basement by one disembodied voice, but then
told to go back by another. Rightly confused
by the fact that the glasses help him hear
things, he goes down to see what he can see.
Upstairs the adults take a quick
detour to see if they can even get out,
and find out that they can not. They also find
out that Dennis brought a backup suit with him,
just in case his ruse failed and he wanted to
be more comfortable and stylish. Due to his
special abilities and potential knowledge of this
place, Arthur insists he stick with the group.
Back downstairs, there are all kinds of rooms
opening all over. Bobby seems to have an innate
understanding of the situation. And, with his
love for and fascination with all things dead,
he ventures ahead fearlessly. Until he sees how
gross they can be. This sends him racing off
through a funhouse of horrors, and he eventually
clips a corner and winds up unconscious.
Meanwhile, Dennis explains for our benefit that
ghosts are beholden to certain types of spells,
which are inscribed on the
various walls and surfaces
all around them. He also explains the basement
situation and establishes the employment of
special specs that are necessary to see the
ghosts. Arthur doesn't really care for this
particular brand of bullshit, and tries
to keep him focused on the task at hand.
Bobby comes to some time later to a voice
telling him to put on his glasses. When he does,
he sees his mom approaching, but she’s
all burned up. Then Cyrus does something.
Due to the size of the house Arthur recommends
splitting up into two groups to cover more ground
while, invisible to them, stuff
inside the house keeps spinning.
Dennis notes the curious fact that more
doors are now open, and then uses the
glasses to reveal the reality of ghosts existing
to Maggie, which she honestly takes pretty well,
all things considered. Of course, her
attitude sours when they find themselves
dealing with a creepy young lad and a cut up
naked lady, both of whom they narrowly avoid.
Elsewhere, Arthur and Kathy find Bobby’s recorder
and glasses. The recorder only confirms that
he may have died screaming, but they put that
thought out of their minds. Kathy puts on her
bro’s glasses at just the right time to impose
upon Arthur the actual existence of ghosts,
but at just the wrong time to avoid getting
mauled. As she’s dragged around and ravaged,
Kalina appears at just the right time to
scare off their ethereal attacker with a
road flare - a ghost’s only weakness. This
allows Kathy to be dragged again, but for
her own good this time, and they eventually
arrive safely behind a wall of protection.
With a moment to breathe, Kalina introduces
herself and grants Arthur the gift of sight.
She explains Cyrus’s efforts as the enslavement
of souls, which she intends to reverse by setting
them all free. She also confirms she infiltrated
the edifice through a shifting hole that has since
closed up. She further explains to them that
their new house is actually not a house at all,
but a large machine created from a
fifteenth century book that was written
under influence of the devil himself. It’s purpose
*I don’t give a shit* touche. Also, Kathy is now
gone and the boy’s here, but he doesn’t know
Kalina intends to free him, so they must run.
As the house continues to shift, Maggie
inadvertently gets separated from Dennis,
locking him in a box sans
glasses. While he’s in there,
he is assaulted by a dead greaser armed with
a sparkle bat. But after avoiding major injury
for a few minutes, he’s eventually provided
the opportunity to tuck and roll his way out.
While that’s going on Arthur and Kalina
hit a dead end, and then are horrified to
find that this house contains ghosts. With
few spots downstairs free of apparitions,
Kalina suggests they make for
the well-protected liberry.
Dennis and Maggie have a similar thought
about the potential safety of being
upstairs, but are horrified to find there are
ghosts up there as well. But it’s all good,
because baby Huey and his grandma sister don’t
have the cardio to keep up. In their retreat,
they are finally reunited with the
others. Feeling safety in numbers,
they drop their guard a bit, resulting in Arthur
assuming the position and getting his back raked.
They toss another flickerstick to free him,
and conclude the final leg of their journey.
Finally safe, they blow off some steam
by arguing about who did what to whom,
etc. - before Arthur commands their attention
and insists they get back to a solution-oriented
dialogue. But then Kalina reveals to him that the
fourth ghost is the spirit of his precious wife.
She then takes him through the rogue’s gallery,
explaining that the machine releases the ghosts,
then draws them in to use their energy to unlock
the Occularis - an object that grants its wielder
ultimate knowledge. The thirteenth ghost is
a failsafe required to shut it down - a ghost
resulting from the willing sacrifice of a
life out of pure love. That’s you Artie,
you get to sacrifice yourself! But Dennis
insists there must be another way out of this
and convinces him to make one last attempt to
go out into the haunted house to find his kids.
Approaching this rationally, they grab
a wall of protection to help them along
while Kalina and Maggie go to set some explosive
charges. They each venture deep into the machine,
slowly and carefully. Soon Kalina
finds the heart of the beast - the
gravity drive. Then a ghost joins them and
Kalina goes to swat at it with her book,
but appears to have poor aim...until the double
cross is revealed. She’s excited to be reunited,
but Cyrus is like get off me
woman, I needs m’ spell book.
Elsewhere the boys find themselves in a
dire situation. Upon approach of a ghost,
Dennis lodges the door in a corner with only
room for one of them. So Arthur is wedged in
there and forced to watch as Dennis gets
all smashed up and cranked across a pole.
At the spinning floor portion of the
machine Cyrus gets to work on the spells
while Kalina imperils the kids in an
attempt to compel Arthur’s sacrifice
as the thirteenth ghost is actually needed
to initiate the machine, not stop it. As
this final phase begins the ghosts all leave,
but not before Jean gets in one last goodbye.
Now that they’re all prepped up, Cyrus
double crosses the double crosser,
just to tie off any loose ends. He then arrives
at the big show where all the machine stuff starts
happening, and Bobby’s there - remember
him? Artie has a face off with his uncle,
recapping in his mind all the rules that were laid
out for him and counting off the twelve ghosts.
Recognizing that if he is to be the
thirteenth ghost, that can only mean….
They then have a disagreement about
who will fulfill that role and,
before reaching common ground, Maggie
distracts them on the ones and twos.
With the spells no longer running and her flipping
switches like crazy, the machine disengages,
freeing the spirits and allowing them
to take revenge against their master.
Ghost Dennis then appears to provide some causal
encouragement to Arthur, who times things just
right and jumps out to his children in order to
save them. Very impressive. Although, it’s not
clear to me how him being there changes anything.
The machine then falls apart around them, and the
ghosts return to the world. Except Jean - they
have a brief staring contest with their ghost mom.
When she loses, she’s banished to hell. Finally,
just to make sure the movie ends on an up beat,
we transition to credits as Maggie lets us all
know exactly how she’s feeling. No punches pulled!
Thirteen Ghosts did not receive critical acclaim
when it was released. And I get that. It has huge
expositional dump outs, and sometimes jumps from
one thing to another in order to do what it wants
rather than doing what makes sense. A couple of
examples of this would be Dennis’s costume change,
or the inconsistent way they utilized the glasses
- you can’t see the ghosts without the glasses,
but even when they’re on they
seem to blink in and out. Also,
people seem to be unaffected by noises the
ghosts make or being physically manipulated
by the ghosts until they put glasses on, but
then don’t always need to have the glasses
on for these things to take effect. The
movie is inconsistent with its own rules
Even so, this film is mostly here to have fun and
I can see why it is now so highly regarded as a
cult favorite. If you were younger when you caught
this one, it would be like a visual carnival for
the senses. It has a Mummy/Tomb Raider vibe and
comes across like a Disney Haunted Mansion movie,
but rated R so it has extensive gore and adult
themes. Also, it has Shannon Elizabeth and Matthew
Lillard, automatically making it an extremely
“product of the time it was made” type of movie,
which means it’s going to hold some pretty
deep-running nostalgic roots for people.
Hey, I recently bought a box set of Chuck
Norris action movies that I remember running
during Saturday matinees on a local station
when I was younger, so who am I to judge?
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you
can support the channel through
donations or merch. Any donation unlocks
uncensored movie reviews of Lifeforce,
Under the Skin and Possessor, with others to
be added over time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.